Add episode 29 (#255)
trinodb/trino.io: _episodes/29.md

---
layout: episode
title:  "29: What is Trino and the Hive connector"
date: 2021-10-28
tags: beginner sql hive connector
youtube_id: "xAnKbpKSPtA"
wistia_id: "75w1kryofe"
sections: 
   - title: "Concept of the week"
     desc: "What is Trino?"
     time: 1023
   - title: "PR of the week"
     desc: "PR 8821 Add HTTP/S query event logger"
     time: 3515
   - title: "Question of the week"
     desc: "Does the Hive connector depend on the Hive runtime?"
     time: 3763
---

## Release 364 

Release 364 is just around the corner, here is Manfred's release preview:

> * ALTER MATERIALIZED VIEW ... RENAME TO

Reviewer: code highlighting

> * whole bunch of performance improvements

Reviewer: A whole bunch of

* Elasticsearch connector no longer fails with unsupported types
* Hive connector has optimize procedure now!
* Parquet and avro fixes and improvements

## Concept of the week: What is Trino?

Trino is the project created by Martin Traverso, Dain Sundstrom, David Phillips,
and Eric Hwang in 2012 to replace the 300PB Hive data warehouse at Facebook. The
goal of Trino is to run fast ad-hoc analytics queries over big data file systems
like HDFS and object stores like S3. 

An initially unintended but now characteristic feature of Trino is also its 
ability to execute federated queries over various distributed data sources. This
includes, but is not limited to: Accumulo, BigQuery, Apache Cassandra, 

> ClickHouse, Druid, Elasticsearch, Google Sheets, Apache Iceberg, Apache Hive, 

Reviewer: make this list shorter and end with "and others" .. and link that to the connectors section of the docs

Author: I wanted to keep this here to be thorough and also for the SEO :)

Reviewer: sure .. but still add the "and others" and the link .. you could even make each word a link...

Reviewer 2: A link would be nice for sure.

JMX, Apache Kafka, Kinesis, Kudu, MongoDB, MySQL, Oracle, Apache Phoenix, 
Apache Pinot, PostgreSQL, Prometheus, Redis, Redshift, SingleStore (MemSQL), 
Microsoft SQL Server. 
 
How does Trino query across everything from data lakes, SQL, and NoSQL databases

> at unprecedented speeds? It will help to start by going over Trino's 

Reviewer: It helps to start by looking at Trino's architecture:

architecture to understand the answer to that question.

<p align="center">
<img align="center" width="75%" height="100%" src="/assets/episode/29/1-architecture.png"/><br/>
Source: <a href="https://trino.io/blog/2021/04/21/the-definitive-guide.html">Trino: The Definitive Guide</a>.
</p>

Trino consists of two types of nodes, a _coordinator_ and _worker_ nodes. The 

> coordinator parses, analyzes, plan, and schedules SQL queries input by the user.

Reviewer: plans, and schedules the processing of SQL queries. The queries are submitted by users directly or with connected SQL reporting tools.

> The workers actually carry out the task by reading the data from the source or

Reviewer: actually carry out more of the processing by reading data from

Source: <a href="https://trino.io/blog/2021/04/21/the-definitive-guide.html">Trino: The Definitive Guide</a>.
</p>

Many of these interfaces are used in the coordinator during the analysis and 
planning phases. The analyzer, for example, uses the metadata SPI to make sure
the table in the `FROM` clause actually exists in the data source.  

<p align="center">
<img align="center" width="75%" height="100%" src="/assets/episode/29/4-distributed-query-plan.png"/><br/>
Source: <a href="https://trino.io/blog/2021/04/21/the-definitive-guide.html">Trino: The Definitive Guide</a>.
</p>

Once a logical query plan is generated, the coordinator then converts this to a
distributed query plan that maps actions into stages that contain tasks to be
run on nodes. Stages model the sequence of events and a directed acyclic graph
(DAG).

<p align="center">
<img align="center" width="75%" height="100%" src="/assets/episode/29/5-task-management.png"/><br/>
Source: <a href="https://trino.io/blog/2021/04/21/the-definitive-guide.html">Trino: The Definitive Guide</a>.
</p>

The coordinator then schedules tasks over the worker nodes as efficiently as 

> possible depending on the physical layout and distribution of the data.

Reviewer: possible, depending

<p align="center">
<img align="center" width="75%" height="100%" src="/assets/episode/29/6-splits.png"/><br/>
Source: <a href="https://trino.io/blog/2021/04/21/the-definitive-guide.html">Trino: The Definitive Guide</a>.
</p>

Data is split and distributed across the nodes to provide internode parallelism.

<p align="center">
<img align="center" width="75%" height="100%" src="/assets/episode/29/7-parallelism-over-drivers.png"/><br/>
Source: <a href="https://trino.io/blog/2021/04/21/the-definitive-guide.html">Trino: The Definitive Guide</a>.
</p>

Once this data arrives to the node, it is further divided and processed in 

> parallel.

Reviewer: need to add the last part ...

workers submitted processed data back to coordinator .. and coordinator provides the results of the query to the user.

> ## PR 8821 Add HTTP/S query event logger

Reviewer: empty line after title

[Pull request 8821]({{site.github_repo_url}}/pull/8821) enables Trino cluster 

> owners to consume query metadata. This may be used for usage monitoring and 

Reviewer: query processing metadata

alarming, but it might also be used to extract analytics on cluster usage, such 
as tables/column usage metrics.

Query events (creation, competition, and splitting) are serialized to JSON and 

> sent to the provided address over HTTP or over HTTPS (this needs a certificate 

Reviewer: remove the whole stuff in ()

and PK shared between this plugin and the receiving service so that both sides 
can trust the other). Configuration allows enabling of only the needed events.

> Thanks for the contribution mosiac1!

Reviewer: Also .. we might want to mention that this was contributed by Bloomberg (if we are allowed) .. and we definitely should link to the docs for it

---
layout: episode
title:  "29: What is Trino and the Hive connector"
date: 2021-10-28
tags: beginner sql hive connector
youtube_id: "xAnKbpKSPtA"
wistia_id: "75w1kryofe"
sections: 
   - title: "Concept of the week"
     desc: "What is Trino?"
     time: 1023
   - title: "PR of the week"
     desc: "PR 8821 Add HTTP/S query event logger"
     time: 3515
   - title: "Question of the week"
     desc: "Does the Hive connector depend on the Hive runtime?"
     time: 3763
---

## Release 364 

Release 364 is just around the corner, here is Manfred's release preview:

* `ALTER MATERIALIZED VIEW` ... `RENAME TO`
* A whole bunch of performance improvements
* Elasticsearch connector no longer fails with unsupported types
* Hive connector has optimize procedure now!
* Parquet and avro fixes and improvements

## Concept of the week: What is Trino?

Trino is the project created by Martin Traverso, Dain Sundstrom, David Phillips,
and Eric Hwang in 2012 to replace the 300PB Hive data warehouse at Facebook. The
goal of Trino is to run fast ad-hoc analytics queries over big data file systems
like HDFS and object stores like S3. 

> An initially unintended but now characteristic feature of Trino is also its 

Reviewer: remove "also"

<p align="center">
<img align="center" width="75%" height="100%" src="/assets/episode/29/7-parallelism-over-drivers.png"/><br/>
Source: <a href="https://trino.io/blog/2021/04/21/the-definitive-guide.html">Trino: The Definitive Guide</a>.
</p>

Once this data arrives to the node, it is further divided and processed in 
parallel. Workers submit the processed data back to coordinator. Finally, the 
coordinator provides the results of the query to the user.

## PR 8821 Add HTTP/S query event logger

[Pull request 8821]({{site.github_repo_url}}/pull/8821) enables Trino cluster 
owners to query processing metadata. This may be used for usage monitoring and 
alarming, but it might also be used to extract analytics on cluster usage, such 
as tables/column usage metrics.

Query events are serialized to JSON and sent to the provided address over HTTP 
or over HTTPS. Configuration allows enabling of only the needed events.

Thanks for the contribution mosiac1 and others at Bloomberg!

[Read the docs](https://trino.io/docs/current/admin/event-listeners-http.html) 
to learn more about this exciting feature!

## Question of the week: Does the Hive connector depend on the Hive runtime?

> This weeks question covers a lot of the confusion around the [Hive

Reviewer: Add the answer here. .. 

In short, the answer is that the Hive runtime is not required. A lot more information is available in the Intro ...

---
layout: episode
title:  "29: What is Trino and the Hive connector"
date: 2021-10-28
tags: beginner sql hive connector
youtube_id: "xAnKbpKSPtA"
wistia_id: "75w1kryofe"
sections: 
   - title: "Concept of the week"
     desc: "What is Trino?"
     time: 1023
   - title: "PR of the week"
     desc: "PR 8821 Add HTTP/S query event logger"
     time: 3515
   - title: "Question of the week"
     desc: "Does the Hive connector depend on the Hive runtime?"
     time: 3763
---

## Release 364 

Release 364 is just around the corner, here is Manfred's release preview:

> * `ALTER MATERIALIZED VIEW` ... `RENAME TO`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `ALTER MATERIALIZED VIEW ... RENAME TO`
```

This renders better than how it looks now.

* A whole bunch of performance improvements

> * Elasticsearch connector no longer fails with unsupported types

Reviewer 2: maybe?

```suggestion
* Elasticsearch connector no longer fails if fields with unsupported types exist
```

* Hive connector has optimize procedure now!

> * Parquet and avro fixes and improvements

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Parquet and Avro fixes and improvements
```

## Concept of the week: What is Trino?

Trino is the project created by Martin Traverso, Dain Sundstrom, David Phillips,
and Eric Hwang in 2012 to replace the 300PB Hive data warehouse at Facebook. The
goal of Trino is to run fast ad-hoc analytics queries over big data file systems
like HDFS and object stores like S3. 

An initially unintended but now characteristic feature of Trino is its ability 
to execute federated queries over various distributed data sources. This
includes, but is not limited to: Accumulo, BigQuery, Apache Cassandra, 
ClickHouse, Druid, Elasticsearch, Google Sheets, Apache Iceberg, Apache Hive, 
JMX, Apache Kafka, Kinesis, Kudu, MongoDB, MySQL, Oracle, Apache Phoenix, 
Apache Pinot, PostgreSQL, Prometheus, Redis, Redshift, SingleStore (MemSQL), 
Microsoft SQL Server. 
 

> How does Trino query across everything from data lakes, SQL, and NoSQL databases

Reviewer 2: The images below this point all appear "before" the text that explains the image which seems like the reverse of what reads naturally. Was this intended? Either way is fine but I personally prefer the images following the text (especially because the paragraphs are small and images close together).

Author: Yeah, I actually think this changes depending on the person. I make inferences based on visual queues first then like to read the rationale behind the image after. In certain cases where I think the image is confusing without explanation I may do some explaining to ease the user into an image. I leave this up to personal style and will just leave it as is if that's cool with you.

at unprecedented speeds? It helps to start by going over Trino's architecture:

<p align="center">
<img align="center" width="75%" height="100%" src="/assets/episode/29/1-architecture.png"/><br/>
Source: <a href="https://trino.io/blog/2021/04/21/the-definitive-guide.html">Trino: The Definitive Guide</a>.
</p>

> Trino consists of two types of nodes, a _coordinator_ and _worker_ nodes. The 

Reviewer 2: types of nodes doesn't care about counts so `a _coordinator_` reads weird. Maybe drop the `a`?

coordinator plans, and schedules the processing of SQL queries. The queries are 
submitted by users directly or with connected SQL reporting tools. The workers 
actually carry out more of the processing by reading the data from the source or
performing various operations within the task(s) they are assigned.

<p align="center">
<img align="center" width="75%" height="100%" src="/assets/episode/29/2-SPI.png"/><br/>
Source: <a href="https://trino.io/blog/2021/04/21/the-definitive-guide.html">Trino: The Definitive Guide</a>.
</p>

Trino is able to query over multiple data types by exposing a common interface
called the SPI (Service Provider Interface) that enables the core engine to
treat the interactions with each data source the same. Each connector must then

> implement exposing metadata, statistics, data location, and establish one or 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
implement the SPI which includes exposing metadata, statistics, data location, and establishing one or 
```

the table in the `FROM` clause actually exists in the data source.  

<p align="center">
<img align="center" width="75%" height="100%" src="/assets/episode/29/4-distributed-query-plan.png"/><br/>
Source: <a href="https://trino.io/blog/2021/04/21/the-definitive-guide.html">Trino: The Definitive Guide</a>.
</p>

Once a logical query plan is generated, the coordinator then converts this to a
distributed query plan that maps actions into stages that contain tasks to be
run on nodes. Stages model the sequence of events and a directed acyclic graph
(DAG).

<p align="center">
<img align="center" width="75%" height="100%" src="/assets/episode/29/5-task-management.png"/><br/>
Source: <a href="https://trino.io/blog/2021/04/21/the-definitive-guide.html">Trino: The Definitive Guide</a>.
</p>

The coordinator then schedules tasks over the worker nodes as efficiently as 
possible, depending on the physical layout and distribution of the data.

<p align="center">
<img align="center" width="75%" height="100%" src="/assets/episode/29/6-splits.png"/><br/>
Source: <a href="https://trino.io/blog/2021/04/21/the-definitive-guide.html">Trino: The Definitive Guide</a>.
</p>

> Data is split and distributed across the nodes to provide internode parallelism.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Data is split and distributed across the worker nodes to provide inter-node parallelism.
```

<p align="center">
<img align="center" width="75%" height="100%" src="/assets/episode/29/7-parallelism-over-drivers.png"/><br/>
Source: <a href="https://trino.io/blog/2021/04/21/the-definitive-guide.html">Trino: The Definitive Guide</a>.
</p>

> Once this data arrives to the node, it is further divided and processed in 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once this data arrives to the worker node, it is further divided and processed in 
```

parallel. Workers submit the processed data back to coordinator. Finally, the 
coordinator provides the results of the query to the user.

## PR 8821 Add HTTP/S query event logger

> [Pull request 8821]({{site.github_repo_url}}/pull/8821) enables Trino cluster 
> owners to query processing metadata. This may be used for usage monitoring and 
> alarming, but it might also be used to extract analytics on cluster usage, such 
> as tables/column usage metrics.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Pull request 8821]({{site.github_repo_url}}/pull/8821) enables Trino cluster 
owners to log query processing metadata by submitting it to an HTTP endpoint. This may be used for usage monitoring and 
alarming, but it might also be used to extract analytics on cluster usage, such 
as tables/column usage metrics.
```

Reviewer 2: Or `submit query processing metadata to an HTTP endpoint`.

Query events are serialized to JSON and sent to the provided address over HTTP 

> or over HTTPS. Configuration allows enabling of only the needed events.

Reviewer 2: maybe?
```suggestion
or over HTTPS. Configuration allows selecting which events should be included.
```

> Thanks for the contribution mosiac1 and others at Bloomberg!

Reviewer 2: Maybe link to `mosiac1`'s GitHub?

[Read the docs](https://trino.io/docs/current/admin/event-listeners-http.html) 
to learn more about this exciting feature!

## Question of the week: Does the Hive connector depend on the Hive runtime?

> This weeks question covers a lot of the confusion around the [Hive

Reviewer 2: `week's`?
